Introduction Transformers with softmax attention (Vaswani et al., 2017)
enjoy efficient parallel training but suffer from quadratic
(in sequence length) complexity, thus motivating more RNN-like models that allow for linear-time sequence modeling. Linear attention, which replaces the exponential similarity function with a simple dot product over (possibly transformed) key/query vectors, has emerged as a promising alternative to classic softmax attention (Katharopoulos et al.,
2020; Choromanski et al., 2021; Kasai et al., 2021; Peng et al., 2021). An attractive property of linear attention is that it admits a “recurrent form” in which it can be formulated as a linear RNN with 2D hidden states (Katharopoulos et al.,
2020), thus enabling linear-time inference. For training,
linear attention also admits a subquadratic “chunkwise parallel form” which divides the sequence into non-overlapping chunks and performs (serial) inter-chunk recurrent computations followed by (parallel) intra-chunk computations (Hua et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023a; Lingle, 2023), thus (partially)
maintaining parallel training. However, existing algorithms for linear attention are not I/O aware and thus, in practice,
slower than optimized implementations of softmax attention
(Dao et al., 2022b; Dao, 2023) on moderate sequence lengths.
From a performance standpoint, linear attention has generally been found to underperform ordinary softmax attention,
often by a significant margin in language modeling (Kasai et al., 2021). Recent variants of linear attention such as RetNet (Sun et al., 2023a) and TransNormerLLM (Qin et al.,
2023b) obtain significant improvements by multiplying the current hidden state with a decay factor before the RNN update. However, these works use a global, dataindependent decay factor, despite the fact that in 1D RNNs,
a data-dependent gating mechanism has been shown to be crucial for performance (van der Westhuizen & Lasenby,
2018; Qin et al., 2023c). And even with the decay factor,
linear attention Transformers underperform the strongest Transformer architectures when pretrained from scratch.
This work develops a hardware-efficient algorithm for linear attention, and applies it to train a gated variant of linear attention that is competitive with softmax attention. We first discuss aspects of optimizing ordinary linear attention on modern GPUs and give two I/O-aware algorithms (tailored for different training settings) based on these principles (§3).
Our implementation of the algorithm, called FLASHLINGated Linear Attention Transformers with Hardware-Efficient Training EARATTENTION, is faster than FLASHATTENTION-2 (Dao,
2023) even on short (e.g., 1K) sequences. We then describe a gated linear attention layer with a data-dependent gating mechanism and show how FLASHLINEARATTENTION can be generalized to the gated case (§4). We study the resulting gated linear attention (GLA) Transformer on moderate-scale language modeling benchmarks, where we train models with 340M/1.3B parameters on 15B/100B tokens, respectively.
We find that the GLA Transformer performs favorably against a strong LLaMA architecture Transformer baseline that makes use of recent recipes (Transformer++; Touvron et al., 2023) as well as recent linear-time sequence models such as RetNet (Sun et al., 2023a) and Mamba (Gu & Dao,
2023). GLA Transformer is found to be particularly strong at length generalization and recall-intensive tasks among linear recurrent models. For training speed, the GLA Transformer has significantly higher throughput than a similarly sized Mamba model.